---
title: 'Crystal Structure, Wave Diffraction and the Reciprocal Lattice'
date: 2025-01-11
permalink: /posts/2025-01-11-post
tags:
  - Quantum Mechanics
  - Condensed Matter Physics


---



Introduction to Solid State Physics: Chapter 1&2
=====

## Periodic Arrays of Atoms

### Lattice translation vectors

An ideal crystal is constructed by the infinite repetition of identical groups of atoms. A group is called the basis. The set of mathematical points to which the basis is attached is called the lattice. 
$$
\begin{equation}
\textbf{r}'= \textbf{r}+u_1  \textbf{a}_1+u_2 \textbf{a}_2+u_3 \textbf{a}_3
 \end{equation}
$$

There is no cell of smaller volume than $$a_1, a_2, a_3$$ that can serve as a building block for the crystal structure. We often use the primitive translation vectors to define the crystal axes.

### Primitive lattice cell

The parallelepiped defined by primitive axes $$a_1, a_2, a_3$$ is called a primitive cell.  A primitive cell is a type of cell or unit cell.

## The Bragg law

When the wavelength of the radiation is comparable with or smaller than the lattice constant, we may find diffracted beams in directions quite different from the incident direction.

Consider parallel lattice planes spaced $$d$$ apart. The radiation is incident in the plane of the paper. The path difference for rays reflected from adjacent planes is $$2d \sin{\theta}$$ , where is measured from the plane. Constructive interference of the radiation from successive planes occurs when the path difference is an integral number n of wavelengths , so that
$$
 \begin{equation}
 2d\sin{\theta}=n\lambda
 \end{equation} 
$$
This is the Bragg law, which can be satisfied only for wavelength $$\lambda \le 2d$$.

## Scattered Wave Amplitude

### Fourier analysis

